ote: This is a mere outline to get you to start thinking about the topic. This is not a synopsis or a model essay. Just brainstorming. We’re eager to read your essays! Please post them in the comments. 

 

 

Intro:

It’s a quote by Bertrand Russell. Explain the context in which it was said. Mention that the Nobel Prize in Literature 1950 was awarded to Bertrand Russell “in recognition of his varied and significant writings in which he champions humanitarian ideals and freedom of thought.”

 

Para 1: 

Talk about the state of the world today- the people (personalities), various events in the domestic & international arena in various different spheres (international relations, governance, environment, technological arena, etc) that illustrate the topic – where fools are certain of themselves but the wiser ones are filled with doubts. Don’t go into the specifics – just give a broad picture here.

 

Para 2: 

Let’s start delving into the specifics now.

Define a fanatic. Cambridge dictionary defines a fanatic as “a person who has very extreme beliefs that may lead them to believe in unreasonable or violent ways.” Example: a religious fanatic. “A person whose strong admiration for something is extreme & unreasonable.” E.g.: a fitness fanatic or a sycophant.

Give examples of such scenarios in today’s world.

Define who is considered as wise & talk about the reason they’re wise is that they are aware that nothing is certain. They are open to multifarious thoughts & events. They do not draw a final conclusion about anything with 100% certainty.

 

Explain cognitive bias.

Explain The Dunning-Kruger effect occurs when a person’s lack of knowledge and skills in a certain area cause them to overestimate their own competence. By contrast, this effect also causes those who excel in a given area to think the task is simple for everyone, and underestimate their relative abilities as well.

 

Para 3:

Elaborate why fools & fanatics who are certain about themselves are a danger to the society. Why are they a problem? How does it affect the home/family, society, nation & the world? Elaborate why the wise are an asset to the society ad how their open-mindedness is beneficial to all.

 

Para 4: 

Let’s explain one by one.

POLITICAL SPHERE:

Describe the type of fanatics found in this realm. The people who have blind & extreme admiration for a party, a political leader or an ideology. How are they a threat to the society? What are the consequences? Elaborate with examples.

Personality cults, dictatorships. 

Contrast it with how the wise think & behave. They are prudent & know that humans & man-made ideologies, political parties are fallible & should be open to constant improvements. They employ logical reasoning.

Substantiate with examples.

 

 

Para 5:

RELIGIOUS SPHERE:

Religious fanatics harbor extreme beliefs which may have disastrous consequences for a society. Violence, communalism, creation of a divisive society: are just a few of the terrible consequences. Following somebody’s extreme preaching or an illogical set of rules without due diligence & reasoning can harm society.

Give examples.  Echo chamber. 

Contrast it with how the wise view religion. Give examples.Hi bbbaskajkjahdkjsbak
